[Music]
good morning and welcome to breakfast
with chris mason and sally nugent our
headlines today
a new daily high for covert vaccinations
but
as infection rates surge in europe
there's a warning that summer holidays
abroad
will be extremely unlikely a snapshot of
life during the pandemic
millions of people are due to take part
in a once in a
census good morning whalesis hopes for
the grand slam are crushed
after a last-minute try from france
breaks
welsh hearts
and raccoons on zoom we will meet
the animals livening up our virtual
meetings
and whilst we won't hit the 18 celsius
some hit yesterday
today most places dry and there'll be a
little bit more sunshine around
the details of that and your forecast
for the week here on breakfast
[Music]
just after eight o'clock it is sunday
the 21st of march good morning to you
our top story more than half of all
adults in the uk
have now received their first
coronavirus vaccine
a milestone hailed by the health
secretary as a
phenomenal achievement but as parts of
europe brace for a third wave of
infections
scientists here say the prospect of
summer holidays abroad
may be impacted john mcmanus reports
it's been a record-making week in the uk
at least as far as covid vaccines are
concerned
on friday more than and eleven thousand
doses were administered to the public
that means that more than half of the
uk's adult population
have now received their first jab the
government says the vaccination program
is a phenomenal achievement and it
insists it's on
track to offer jabs to all of the over
50s by mid april
the vaccination program is our route out
of the pandemic
it will help us to protect people and we
know that these vaccines
protect you but we also know that they
protect
those around you and they make it less
likely
that others your loved ones will catch
coronavirus too
and of course for all of us they're our
root out so
i'm just delighted that so many people
are coming forward and getting the jab
over the past year the uk has suffered
the highest death toll in europe
now numbers of infections and deaths are
dropping
but in parts of mainland europe the
virus is reasserting its grip
in response parts of poland and france
have reintroduced partial lockdowns
preventing those different variants of
covid entering the uk
has led to a warning from scientists
that holidays overseas this summer
are extremely unlikely if we were doing
better with the vaccination campaign in
the eu
the story may be a little bit different
as to where we might be in terms of
being able to travel
i think it's been hugely damaging in the
eu i think it's
really mixed messaging the key thing to
me is we need as many people as possible
to take the vaccines as rapidly as
possible so that we can
get to high levels of protection rapidly
so that we can open up
which hopefully in the longer term will
include traveling internationally again
it's not just holiday makers who want to
travel though those with families living
abroad
are keen to swap online chat for the
real thing
one way of achieving that might be a
traffic light system
where travellers are given the green
light to visit less risky countries
while others remain on red john mcmanus
bbc news
well let's talk to our political
correspondent jonathan blake
morning to you jonathan i guess there's
only one question really that matters
which is
is the time scale set out by the
government for things opening up
including foreign travel
gonna stick or gonna slip morning chris
and i'm afraid
i don't have the answer that matters for
you this morning other than to say
it's certainly not going to be
accelerated but the watchword in
government is still
caution and i think it was interesting
to hear the reminder from the transport
secretary grant shaps yesterday that the
17th of may
when international travel hopefully will
be allowed
is at the very earliest and that's
always been the case but i think it's
worth reminding ourselves of that
at this point so that's one key date for
your diary the other is the 12th of
april
when the government's vaccine
international travel task force
will report and hopefully give some
detail on where
and how people will be allowed to travel
this
summer so if you're waiting to book a
holiday or you've got one booked
there should be some more detail then
one possible idea as you heard in john's
report there this idea of a traffic
light system where countries will be
graded according to the level of
coronavirus cases and also the
speed and density of the vaccine roll
out in those individual countries it
very much depends
on what's happening elsewhere as well as
what is happening
in the uk it does remain the aspiration
and the hope
in government that international travel
will be allowed this summer but it is by
no means
a guarantee thanks very much jonathan
more than 30 people have been arrested
following anti-lockdown demonstrations
in london
crowds marched from hyde park to
westminster after mps urged the
government to allow peaceful protests
during lockdown
scotland yard said a number of officers
were assaulted
some were attacked with bottles
having a coronavirus vaccine could be a
requirement if we want to visit
some countries once we're allowed to
this according to the boss of the
australian airline qantas
alan joyce warned that a number of
governments are looking at introducing
mandatory vaccinations for all
international travelers
as part of a plan to revive the aviation
industry demand for flights has fallen
by
75 as a result of the pandemic
governments are going to insist on i
think some of the european governments
are talking about other governments
around the world as a condition of entry
but even if it wasn't we think we have a
duty of care to our passengers to our
crew
and to say that everybody in that
aircraft needs to be safe
refugees who come to the uk as part of a
government scheme to help
people fleeing war are to be granted
indefinite leave to remain on arrival
new approach is part of a series of
changes to the asylum system being
announced
by the home secretary priti patel this
week at present refugees are allowed to
stay for five years
and then have to make an application to
live here permanently
flooding in parts of new south wales has
been described by officials as a
once in a century event thousands more
people could be ordered to leave their
homes
the torrential rain is forecast to
continue through most of the week
let's speak now to our correspondent in
sydney phil mercer phil what is the
latest that you can tell us
well australia is the land well used to
nature's extremes
but this extreme deep-seated weather
event as it's been described by the new
south wales state government
is breaking records left right and
center the
official view a couple of days ago was
that
sydney was potentially facing a rain
bomb
and certainly western parts of
australia's biggest city
are under severe threat of flooding from
torrential rain that has been hammering
down now
for quite some time adding to the danger
in some suburbs here in sydney
the main dam the main reservoir that
supplies sydney's drinking water at
warrigamba
is uh overflowing for the first time in
about
five years so some very serious
situations
for the authorities to deal with
thousands of people have been ordered to
leave their homes
and many more could follow suit in the
next 24 hours we are expecting some
respite
but not until the end of the week and
what this means
is that already saturated parts of
eastern australia will become more
soaking
of course increasing the risk of
flooding also
the rollout of covid19 vaccinations
is being disrupted here in new south
wales and the authorities have warned
residents to be aware
of life-threatening flooding so it's
raining
and it will still rain as the forecast
suggests for the next few days at least
phil thanks very much indeed
the duke of cambridge just plays the
work of those tackling the pandemic in
countries caught up in war calling them
incredible heroes prince william joined
a video call with syrian aid workers
who've received funding from countries
including the uk
to help vulnerable people affected by a
decade of conflict the duke told the
workers he was overwhelmed
by the scale of the burden they face
now at a time when there are
restrictions on travel for most of us
wales has found itself welcoming an
unexpected visitor a giant walrus
has been spotted in pembrokeshire lucky
wore us thousands of miles away from
home
normally in the arctic circle finds
itself in west wales
it's thought that the animal may be the
same one that was spotted off the coast
of county
kerry in ireland last week and
biologists reckon there's a chance that
it fell asleep on an iceberg
and was then carried south the sort of
wall russian equivalent of getting on a
late night bus and ending up in the
death row
yeah a jar or two more than was perhaps
entirely sensible
what had that walrus been up to my
goodness yeah
yeah he's able to travel which is a
luxury the rest of us are denied
yeah but you only got a single ticket on
that iceberg didn't they so we need to
find out how he's going to get home
don't we there's a follow-up in that
store there is isn't that
now it's nine minutes past eight and a
snapshot of life in england wales and
northern ireland will be captured today
when millions of people take part in a
once in a decade
census the information gathered will be
used by the government and local
authorities to
better fund services but the full
results may not be available to the
public
for 100 years our home editor mark
easton reports
the census builds a picture of your
community when you fill in yours you
help make decisions about services
like local transport and healthcare
almost every decade since
1801 the uk has held a census a detailed
snapshot of our society that helps
governments plan and fund the local
services we need
schools gp surgeries roads transport and
housing
but only for the third time in its long
history part of the country
will not be participating in this census
day
in scotland it's been delayed for a year
because of concerns the results would
reflect the abnormal circumstances
of the pandemic and prove less useful in
the longer term
lockdown means people are not
necessarily staying in their usual
household
or have left the country during the
health emergency
but the event goes ahead in the rest of
the uk with the justification that
understanding the impact of life under
kovid
will be vital in distributing funds
where they're needed most
after the pandemic is over it's easy to
complete the census online
you can do it on a computer tablet
or phone this census for the first time
will be conducted primarily online
ninety percent of households will have
received a letter with a 16 digit code
to access a secure website page but
paper forms are available for those who
need them
the 2021 census includes one new
question counting military veterans
and extra categories on sexual
orientation and gender identity
it is a legal requirement to complete or
be included in the census by the end of
today
although officials will go door to door
to offer support
before prosecuting those who refuse to
comply with a fine
of up to a thousand pounds mark easton
bbc news
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news